KEP-2915: add proposal for replacing the kubelet-config-x.y usage (#2916)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/2915-kubeadm-replace-kubelet-config-x.y/README.md

this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Currently the overall design is faulty as `kubeadm init`, despite supporting a version skew with the kubelet
of N-1, writes a single ConfigMap `kubelet-config-x.y` where `x.y` is the version of the control plane
and not the version of the kubelet on the host where `kubeadm init` is called.

Later, during `join` operations the version `x.y` is determined by looking up the control plane version
of the cluster, via the `kubernetesVersion` field of the `ClusterConfiguration` object stored
in the `kube-system/kubeadm-config` ConfigMap.

During `upgrade` a new `kubelet-config-x.y+1` ConfigMap and RBAC rules are written where `y+1` is the target
MINOR upgrade version. The old `kubelet-config-x.y` are not cleaned up.

Encoding the version in the API object names is redundant and creates unnecessary complications for both

> kubeadm maintainers and users that wish to modify the object in the cluster.

Reviewer: How would we deal with version skew between the kubelet-config contents and kubelet reading it?

Author: the current implementation of kubeadm does not deal with that. the stored KubeletConfiguration GVK is checked if it is known by a version of kubeadm and if it's unknown and error is reported. so the source of truth is the GVK inside the config and not the version in the name of the ConfigMap.

we expect an old GVK in the ConfigMap to still work with newer kubelets for a few releases, but otherwise the current state is that users have to manually upconvert when the time comes and until the kubelet has something like `kubelet --convert foo.yaml` in which case kubeadm could do it for them.

Author: added some notes about that under "risk 3".

encoded version information in the API object names.
- Remove confusion around the version that is encoded in the name - control plane vs kubelet version?
- Simplify user access to the ConfigMap, allowing them to always rely on `kube-system/kubelet-config`
as the default location.
- Simplify the kubeadm logic to not manage the `x.y` version during PUT/GET operations.
- Gradually apply the change to allow users to adapt using a feature gate.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Apply the change within a single release of kubeadm, breaking the users.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

The proposal is to declare the default ConfigMap and RBAC object format of `kubelet-config-x.y`

> deprecated but support it for a GA deprecation period of 1 year (3 kubeadm releases). In parallel,
> introduce objects named `kubelet-config` (without `x.y`) that will become the source of truth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deprecated but support it for a GA deprecation period of 1 year (3 kubeadm releases). In parallel,
introduce an object named `kubelet-config` (without `x.y`) that will become the source of truth.
```

Author: there are multiple objects - ConfigMaps and RBAC rules.

> The switch will be controlled by a new kubeadm specific feature gate (not a core one) called
> `UnversionedKubeletConfigMap`. Using a feature gate for similar changes is common in changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The switch will be controlled by a new kubeadm specific feature gate (not a core one) in ClusterConfiguration called
`UnversionedKubeletConfigMap`. Using a feature gate for similar changes is common in changes
```

in core Kubernetes components and is familiar mechanism to users.

Note that depending on feedback from users the N+x release schedule might be adjusted - e.g.
extending or shortening the Alpha or Beta periods.

#### First release N (when the deprecation happens)

- The feature gate is added as Alpha and disabled by default.
- Users can continue using the old naming format or opt-in into the new naming format

> by enabling the feature gate.

Reviewer: Instead of having a feature gate, have we considered writing both maps at the same time and switch the functionality over time?

Author: this was my first approach on the topic, but i estimated that it would require a hard switch at some point. i have covered it briefly in Alternatives (could expand more there).

we could start writing both ConfigMaps for a few releases and then stop writing the old format after the deprecation, but it seems there is a problem with reading. kubeadm as a client would have to use the old format for a few releases and then suddenly switch to the new format. that would be a hard switch withing one release without the option for users to opt-out. a feature gate during the Beta period would allow them the opt-out.

for reading, we could implement a soft-switch of sorts (for e.g. one release) where the contents of both ConfigMaps are combined, considering both of them as the source of truth, but that feels very messy - e.g. trying to guess what field value the user really wants to use.

Reviewer: > we could start writing both ConfigMaps for a few releases and then stop writing the old format after the deprecation, but it seems there is a problem with reading. kubeadm as a client would have to use the old format for a few releases and then suddenly switch to the new format. that would be a hard switch within one release without the option for users to opt-out. a feature gate during the Beta period would allow them the opt-out.

I agree that a hard switch can be overwhelming for users at a time, although with proper communication and by spreading the change in a 3 or more releases seems like a good way to migrate. I was thinking of something like:

- Write both configmaps in a release (let's say 1.23) + give a release note to users that the older configmaps are going to be non-functional in a future release.
- Start ignoring the older format in 1.24 (making it non-functional) and alerting users through release notes and required changes.
- Removing and cleaning up the older code.

The reason I'm suggesting this approach is to avoid maintaining two code-paths for longer period of times with a feature gate, the solution proposed above seems more a migration than a new feature, although I'm fine either way.

Having a clear cut-date for the migration also helps kubeadm users that have to support multiple versions. Cluster API for example can start detecting the change by version, rather than by version + feature gate and migrating clusters on the fly. I'd assume other users might want to do something similar.

Author: > I agree that a hard switch can be overwhelming for users at a time, although with proper communication and by spreading the change in a 3 or more releases seems like a good way to migrate. I was thinking of something like:

we've decided on a hard switch for the deprecation of the `master` label and taint - without a feature gate over a period of time because a feature gate made it more difficult:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cluster-lifecycle/kubeadm/2067-rename-master-label-taint#using-a-feature-gate
but i still have some concerns that between some of the stages we are going to break users badly.

as the main problem is that a good number of users simply skip reading the release notes.

> The reason I'm suggesting this approach is to avoid maintaining two code-paths for longer period of times with a feature gate, 

the two code paths would be mostly trivial with a ClusterConfiguration.FeatureGates read controlling the formatting of a string.

> the solution proposed above seems more a migration than a new feature, although I'm fine either way.

i'm also fine either way, and would like to hear more opinions before Sept 9th.

> Having a clear cut-date for the migration also helps kubeadm users that have to support multiple versions. Cluster API for example can start detecting the change by version, rather than by version + feature gate and migrating clusters on the fly. I'd assume other users might want to do something similar.

with or without the feature gate idea CAPI would have to adapt for it's upgrade code to populate the missing API objects normally maintained by `kubeadm upgrade apply`. a version check only (==1.24) would be sufficient for CAPI to decide if it has to create a copy of the existing objects into objects with the new name format. i don't think it has to check the state of the feature gate.

AFAIK, CAPI currently has the feature gates of the ClusterConfiguration immutable, which effectively means CAPI users cannot use them:
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/4180

if they can use them and if we go the FG route, this means that CAPI should adapt to the "copy logic" above in 1.23 (Alpha, not 1.24 / Beta).

Reviewer 2: I'm +1 for the feature gate given that this allows users some flexibility in deciding when to switch (and given that the implementation effort seems reasonable).
From a CAPI PoV, I will suggest we wait for this change to become beta active but default; this will allows us to just work by version (but with an escape patch via the feature flag if we decide to wait a little bit longer for any reason).

- Users should remove usage of the feature gate from their infrastructure. Alternatively they can do it
in the next release.

#### Release N+4

- The feature gate is removed.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a kubeadm user that wishes to modify the KubeletConfiguration that kubeadm stores in the cluster
before joining new nodes, I wish to have easy access to a static location such as `kube-system/kubelet-config`
without looking up the control plane version first.

#### Story 2

As a kubeadm maintainer, I wish to simplify the logic in kubeadm that manages the kubelet configuration
read/write operations.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

NONE

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: I wold like a third risk, being kubelet starting to use a new API version for its own configuration, but not providing automatic conversion in place. This will prevent kubeadm to support kubelet N and kubelet N-1 at the same time.

A viable path forward is to use different keys inside the same ConfigMap; in order to make this possible in the future I suggest to start using API version as key in the new ConfigMap instead of kubelet.

Author: i can add this risk in the list.

i think an easier way for us to mitigate would be to ensure that we do not store the latest kubelet API version in the config map for one more release.

for example:
- kubelet API v1beta2 comes out in 1.26.
- for new clusters, kubeadm 1.26 should not write v1beta2 in the CM and should write v1beta1 instead.
- this would allow 1.25 kubelets to join the cluster as well as both 1.26 and 1.25 kubelets would still support v1beta1.

once 1.27 is out (the v1beta2 has been supported for 2 releases):
- new clusters created with kubeadm 1.27 can start writing v1beta2 in the CM.
- 1.26 kubelets would support v1beta2 and they can join the cluster.

i expect sig-node to listen to the requests to support converters on the kubelet CLI (or endpoint) once the v1beta1 is marked as deprecated.

Author: added as "Risk 3", as per my alternative approach above.

a ConfigMap and the related RBAC rules that follow the new naming format. Nodes that are joined
to the cluster later would be able to use this new ConfigMap. During Beta the presence of these
new API objects will become a requirement, unless the users opt-out by disabling the feature gate
stored in the `ClusterConfiguration`.

Cluster API is an example of a project that uses kubeadm for cluster creation, but does not use the
`kubeadm upgrade` command for upgrades. These upgrades are called "immutable node upgrades", where new
version nodes join the cluster and replace the old ones. Similar projects and users would have to
implement their own means to support the Alpha->Beta transition of this feature by populating the required
ConfigMap and RBAC rules before joining new nodes during an immutable upgrade.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer 2: I think that we need also a using test for spinning up a cluster with the feature gate enabled, but without kubelet skew

Author: do you mean adding an extra kubelet skew test - e.g. kubeadm N deploying kubelet N-1?
we can add such a test when the kubelet v1beta2 is added.

i think i should rename **Skew e2e test job**` in the doc to **Join e2e test job**, because i'm realizing the proposed kubeadm vs control-plane skew test case is not important and the important part is that we ensure "join" gets the correct CM.

Author: > we can add such a test when the kubelet v1beta2 is added.

added under "future e2e tests"

> i think i should rename Skew e2e test job` in the doc to Join e2e test job

done.
